**************************
The C programming language
**************************

The C programming language dates back to the early 1970s and was
created mainly by Dennis Richie intended for implementing utilities
from the UNIX operating system, it was also used for rewriting the
UNIX kernel. Such programs had previously been written in assembly
language, but C allowed such programs to be written for once and then
traget different instruction sets.

As a result, C abstracts away from assembly language, but has a rather
tight relationship with assembly in that a seasoned C developer can
easily imagine roughly the assembly code a C program results in.

While some beginners to C see the language as a high level language,
many seasoned C developers regard C as a processor independent macro
assembler. C is also one of the most commonly used computer languages
on the planet. All put together, C offers a very useful programming
environment for low level programming. You can avoid learning the
details of the assembly instruction set at hand, you can re-use code
and move your code to other architectures quickly.

C is not like many modern programming language environments which
offers a rich set of libraries, abstractions and often require
rather significant resources from the machine. Instead, C allows you
to get a lot of the low level programming advantages from assembly
progrmming without having to deal with every detail of it. C is
ideally suited for modest retro computers and allows for fairly rapid
development.
