************
Introduction
************

The C256 and A2560 Foenix computers are modern retro computers. They
are modelled after ideas from the golden era of home computing, the
mid eighties to early nineties when it was still fairly easy to fully grasp
how computers worked.

Later this gave away for faster and more powerful computers which
introduced more and more abstractions and secrets shielding you from
the actual hardware. You may not even really own the modern computing
device you just bought as it is controlled by the vendor.

If you long back to a time when it was easier and the computer was
yours to control, change and play with. If you also have some
nostalgica for old microprocessors or just long for understanding how
it really works, the Foenix computers may be just what you are looking
for.

The early days
==============

I will start off by explaining my own journey towards home computers
and computing in general, which means I will skip over the early days
around mid seventies when I was still at school. I started looking at
computers around 1981, with calculators, then complemented it wiht
home computers. My choice was the Commodore 64, because the Atari 800
that was what I wanted was too expensive, the Atari 400 had a too
crappy keyboard and the C64 just seemed to have the balanace right. It
was no way cheap, but it offered good value for the money compared to
the the alternatives.

At this time little information was known and I stared at the blue
screen and typed some BASIC programs. I had no idea how to make
graphics, it was not provided by the langauge, no information was yet
around and a secondary storage, a datasette drive was sold out
everywhere. Eventually I got one that was a display unit at full
retail price, no way to negotiate down the price at all.

When you are unhappy about information around today, remember it used
to a lot worse, but we got passed it and made these machines to our
owns.

Using old computers today
=========================

Retro computing is popular today, people restore old computers,
develop new software for them, implement emulations to being the
experience to modern computers. Some pimp their computers by adding
more modern storage devices, compute modules, memory expansion and
connectivity. One big problem with old computers are that they were
not built to last for decades. At the time they were introduced, they
might have a commercial life span of three to five years. Three years
was an eternity at this time as the development of new computers and
price erductions happened so fast.

It should come as no surprise that using such computer 25 or 40 years
after it was produced may present some challenges. It may require
special hardware adaptors to drive the computer screen, old
electronics break and they may be hard to come buy in decent operating
condition. While you may get them for free, or a modest sum,
collectors are driving up prices and it may take time to find a
reasonable bargain, that may not be entirely reliable anyway.

While emulation has many uses, there is really no substitute for using
real hardware. As a result, various modern offerings aims to provide
new computers that are either compatible with old or alternative
universe coputers that could have been built but never was.

If you want to run old software, the crop of compatible computers may
be what you are looking for, but if you want to develop you have the
dilemma that these computers are so well understood and explored that
there may not be all that much new left to do and the bar of doing
anything may be very high as you may be judged with the best efforts
from decaded ago when teams worked full time on producing the best
possible software. Here are you, with some spare hours o have fun,
an alternative can be to explore something new that has not fully
examined in depth. You may enter a small community of explorers, but
all these communities are kind of small anyway, so why bother about
the size of the community all that much?

The author faced with this picked the Foenix computers among the
alternatives as they are decently powerful, which makes a lot of
thjngs easier to accomplish, but still being very retro. They also
offer real microprocessors and implement the chipset in FPGA as that
is a very sensible cost effieciet way of doing it today.

Compared to the computers from the era, the Foenix computer are vastly
more powerful with ample memory, good connectivity and easy to use
chunky grahpics (byte oriented pixels).

Finally, these machines are mostly built by hand with love in beautiful
British Columbia.

Foenix computers overview
==========================

The FMX
--------

The Foenix computer started out with the FMX series. These machines
sold fairly well and are quite loaded with features with lots of sound
and audio capabilities. These are sold out, but you may be able to
pick one up second hand if you are interested. You should compare it
to the U series machine that are somewhat simplified version to see if
the extra capabilities of the FMX are needed, otherwise you may very
well consider the U instead. For more high end, see the Generation X
below which is the real successor of ths machine. Still, if these
match your desires and you find a second hand one you may by all means
get it.


The U series
-------------

The second series was the somewhat simplified and cost reduced U (user
edition) machines. Simplfied is compared to the FMX.
Make no mistake, these are seriouslty powerful
machines at a modest price. You get more memory that you most likely
ever need for a computer game of the style you would use on these
computers, good sound and graphics. In addition you can in theory
connect up to 8 game controllers (using adaptors), serial port and
optional ethernet. They utilize an SD card for storage, but can also
host an internal harddrive. The only thing you may possibly wish for
is a reto style floppy disk drive and a parallel port, if you happen
to own an old dot matrix printer. Apart from that you will probably
have everything you will ever need in a little retro gaming computer
for its modest price. Also do not forget that you get a 16 bits
microprocessor, either the WDC65816 (big brother of the well
known 6502) or the much loved 68000 which has one of the best (if not
the best) instruction sets ever used in a microprocessor.

Foenix Junior
-------------

This is a simplified machine tha the true C256 machine. A Commodore 64
(C64) comes with 64K of memory, the Commodore C128 with 128K and of
course there should be a C256 Foenix with 256K of memory and this is
it.

In contrast to the other machines which use 16 or 32 bit
microprocessors, this one has the well known 8 bit 6502 (or WDC65C02
to be precise, as that is what is currently manufactured).

This machine is built for putting in a standard mini ITX enclosure,
allows for connecting a vintage Commodore disk drive and uses a well
though out bank system to deal with the limitation of the 64K
addressing space of the 6502.

If you are looking for a machine to pimp and tinker with, this may
very well be what you are looking for. It is also more limited than
the siblings, which means you will have a little bit more of an
intellectual challenge when you program it. You get the 6502 which is
very familiar to many people who used coputers back in the day.
Compaured to the era machines, it is stil vastly more powerful and can
be seen as I good balance between price and capabilitie for low end
computing.


A2560K
------

This is a hand make keyboard computer, sporting a 32-bit 68040
microprocessor with working MMU. These are for those people that like
all in one keyboard computers. The author is not really a fan of
keyboard computer as I see them as cost reduced computers of the old
age, but still I could not resist the idea of a low production high
quality, hand made fully loaded computer with quality kewyboard with a
no thrills 68040V microprocessor. It is just so unique it was
irresistable. Another reason to buy it is that is was popular at its
time of introduiction, sold fairly well and all machines are
essentially the same with a 68040, no so much to confgiure and choose
from which I apprechiate as it means everyones machine is essentially
the same or very similar.


Generation-X
------------

These are flexible machines in differfent form factors tha take
different microprocessors using modules. In some way they can be seen
as the next version of the FMX machine, which they replace. They are
high end machines with all bells and whistles.



Overall compatibility
---------------------



References

Bil Herd -- Effects of Aging and Heat on Computer Components
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LUe0qzBw-hQ
